The United States of America (U.S.A.), commonly known as the United States (U.S.) or America, is a country primarily located in North America. The third-largest country in the world by land and total area,[c] the U.S. consists of 50 states, a federal district, five major unincorporated territories, nine Minor Outlying Islands[i] and includes 326 Indian reservations. It shares land borders with Canada to its north and with Mexico to its south and has maritime borders with several other countries.[j] With a population of over 334 million,[k] it is the most populous country in the Americas and the third-most populous in the world. The national capital of the United States is Washington, D.C., and its most populous city and principal financial center is New York City.

Ancestors of America's indigenous peoples migrated across the Bering land bridge more than 12,000 years ago. Beginning in 1607, British colonization led to the establishment of the Thirteen Colonies in what is now the Eastern United States. They clashed with the British Crown over taxation and political representation, which led to the American Revolution and the ensuing Revolutionary War. The United States declared independence on July 4, 1776, and went on to become the first country founded on Enlightenment principles of unalienable natural rights, consent of the governed, and republicanism.

Following a series of treaties, conflicts, and acquisitions, the United States expanded across North America. As more states were admitted, sectional division over slavery led to the secession of the Confederate States of America, which fought the remaining states of the Union during the American Civil War (1861–65). With the Union's victory and preservation, slavery was abolished nationally, but relations between different races remained problematic. Industrialization during the late 19th and early 20th centuries led to rapid economic development but also socioeconomic disparities that prompted calls for reforms.
